# Calibre

Calibre here serves as a database of books (self-managed by calibre and should not be touched), which is is under: "/config/Calibre Library".

Ebooks are added to the /import folder which is shared with readarr's download folder.

There is a web interface in port "8780" (maps to 8080 in container)

## Setup
To start the calibre image you just need to run the command:
```bash
docker compose up -d
```
Access the <server_address>:8780 to get to the GUI.
To automatically enable calibre to import the books, you need to:
1. Click on "Add Books"'s down arrow

2. Click on "Control the adding of books"

3. Go to "Automatic adding" Tab

4. Specify the "/import" folder

5. Restart the container.

Aftwards all book put in that folder will be added to the Calibre Database.


## Using ebook-convert as a command.
Calibre comes with the ebook-convert library which is typically used to convert ebooks or even web pages to the desired format.

While the container is running we can access the command using docker's exec command.

### Example
Here I'm trying to use the expresso.recipe to download web pages from expresso.pt to epub format.
```bash
docker exec --user 1000 calibre ebook-convert ./recipes/expresso.recipe /import/expresso.epub  --username <expresso_username> --password <expresso_password>
```
We need to add the `--user 1000` flag in the docker command because this os defined as the user that can control calibre's files as you can see in the docker-compose:
```yaml
  calibre:
    image: lscr.io/linuxserver/calibre
    container_name: calibre
    environment: 
      - PUID=1000
      - PGID=1000
```

The ebook-convert has these commands:

1. ebook-convert

2. <recipe_file_location> (which is inside the container)

3. <output_file_location> (which is inside the container)

4. <output_ebook_format>

5. <recipe_arguments>..

    1. --username <username> (specific to expresso.recipe)

    1. --password <password> (specific to expresso.recipe)


## Using ebook-convert as a cron job
First thing to do is change the .env file to input the user and password to be used to access expresso.pt

### .env
```properties
EXPRESSO_USERNAME=<your_username>
EXPRESSO_PASSWORD=<your_password>
```

Then make sure the cronjob is defined in the cron/calibre-cron file.
```bash
# Add you crontabs here #

23 7 * * 5 /scripts/ebook-download-script.sh >> /var/log/cron.log

# Don't remove the empty line at the end of this file. It is required to run the cron job
```
Here the cron is running a script every Friday at 7:23 AM.

You can add more jobs to this file and they will be run as the user "abc" inside the container.

The script simply calls the ebook-convert with the expresso recipe to download the correct epub.

This should be enough to get the cronjob to run when you want it.


## Making sure the container can run the job
This container does not initialize the cron service by itself so we need to add the cron-init.sh script before running the already existing /init from the container.

### cron-init.sh
```bash
printenv | grep -v "no_proxy" > /etc/environment # Used to allow crontab to access the environment variables

chmod +x /etc/cron.d/calibre-cron
chmod +x /scripts/ebook-download-script.sh
username=$(getent passwd $PUID | awk -F':' '{ print $1 }') #Get the username from the defined PUID | This does not work as it get the kasm-user the abc user is currently 911, it only becomes $PUID after this script runs.
echo "$username\nabc\nroot\n" > /etc/cron.allow #Adding permissions to the user, abc and root to run.
usermod -a -G crontab $username #Adding the user to the crontab group
usermod -a -G crontab abc #Adding the user to the crontab group
crontab -u $username /etc/cron.d/calibre-cron # Run crontab as the user
```

This script begins to print all env variables to the /etc/environment so we can access the variables in the cron (as the cron does not run in a bash environment).
It can read the variables because in the begining of this:

### ebook-downoad-script.sh

```bash
source $HOME/.bash_profile

#Your script here
```

The rest of the commands will take care of permissions for files and run the crontab command as the defined **$PUID** user.

## Why the permission handling?
This container runs all jobs as a root user, so all the files generated by the cronjob's script will be owned by the root user which calibre does not have pemission to import automatically.

So the script needs to be run by the same user as the one that is handling calibre (defined by the PUID).

# Calibre Web
The calibre web part serves mostly to have more beatiful library and sincronize with the Kobo device.

To use this you need to modify the .env file

### .env
```properties
CALIBRE_IMPORT_FOLDER=/path/to/your/books
CALIBRE_CONFIG_FOLDER=/path/to/calibre/config
```

## Setup
In this setup we need both the calibre-web and the normal calibre.

The calibre-web is using the same configuration folder as the normal calibre,
`${CALIBRE_CONFIG_FOLDER}` this allows the web version to use the same database from calibre.

They probably should be in the same docker-compose file but that will be done in the future.

## Importing books
The books that are imported come from the `${CALIBRE_IMPORT_FOLDER}` which is where the readarr docker image is pointing when downloading new books.
From here we just import them in calibre and calibre-web automatically has them in the library

## Syncing with Kobo
To sync with the kobo we need to do a few things.
### Enabling the sync
First you need to:
- Go to admin's page and click on the "Basic configuration".
- Click on "Feature Configuration"
- Toggle "Enable Kobo sync"
    - Notice the "Server External Port"
    - Here you have to change the port to the one docker is mapping to. In this case `8783:8083` we should change the port frmo 8083 to 8783
### Getting the correct url
- Go to your user's profile
- Click on **Kobo Sync Token** > **Create/View**
- Grab the link provided
### Point your kobo to the correct url
- Connect your Kobo to the pc and edit the ".kobo/Kobo/Kobo eReader.conf" file.
- Change the **api_endpoint** to the link provided
- Disconnect the Kobo and sincronize
- Books should now appear

## Troubleshooting 
If download fails for some reason you can always check what might be happening behind the scenes.

Grab the id of the book that is failing the download:
In my case: 
`6f5c1856-ef6a-4fbf-9363-d72237f59adf`
Acess in your browser:

`http://<url_with_token>/v1/library/<book_id>/metadata`

Notice the DownloadUrls.*.Format as they should be EPUB or EPUB3
Notice the DownloadUrls.*.Url, they should point to the url the kobo is going to read.
In this my case the url was pointing to 8083 instead of 8783, so the kobo could not access that port.



## Resetting the password on Calibre-web
Sometimes we forget about the password used so the docker image comes with a tool that helps us there:

`docker exec -it calibre-web python3 /app/calibre-web/cps.py -p /config/app.db -s <user>:<password>`